# Project1
Group Members: Adil Baksh, Griselda Rodriguez, Michael Sanchez

# Analysis of Local Economics and College Institutions in Texas

## Overview
###	The purpose of this project is to explore the local economy through the metrics of poverty rate and median income and the types of institutions including public, private for profit, and private non-profit located in counties in the state of Texas.  The poverty rate and median income were pulled from the US Census American Communities Survey for the year of 2022 and information from college institutions were acquired through the College Scorecard from the United States Department of Education which included information from 2017 to 2022.  The two main questions that are being addressed are as follows: 1) What is the relationship between county poverty rate and institutions’ location and costs to students? 2) What is the relationship between county median income and institutions’ location and costs to students?
## Poverty Rate
###	To begin a qualitative analysis of Poverty Rate and Institutions poverty rate was categorized into 5% categories (0%-5%, 5%-10%, 10%-15%, 15%-20%, and 25% and above).  Through an initial analysis of the distribution of institutions and the poverty rate of the county they are in we can observe that there are no reporting institutions are in a county where less than 5% of the population are below the poverty line.  Another observation seen is that Private Non-Profit institutions are the most numerous in all different categories of poverty level and very little private for-profit institutions have been reported in counties with poverty rates above 20% relative to their counterparts.  To quantify this analysis, a chi-squared test for independence was run with the null hypothesis placing an assumption that the distribution of the types of institutions by poverty rate are independent.  The alternative hypothesis places the assumption that the distribution of the types of institutions and poverty rate are not independent.  A chi-squared test for independence resulted in a p-value of 0.0126 which is less than the significance level of 5%.  This results in a rejection of the null hypothesis and a conclusion that there is an association between the county poverty rate and institution type that are located within.
###	A regression analysis on poverty rate in a county was performed observing the metrics of average yearly cost, tuition for in-state students, and out-of-state students.  Overall, there appears to be no linear relationship between poverty rate and these costs (Average cost: r = -0.1378, In-state: r = -0.1258, out-state: r = =0.04).  When regression analysis was performed by institution type the results are very much similar to the overall results with one exception of private non-profit schools having a negative association with poverty rate implying that private non-profit schools have lower costs in areas with higher poverty rates.
## Median Income
###	To perform the qualitative analysis with county median income the values were distributed evenly in categories $45,000 - $60,000, $60,000-$75,000, $75,000 - $90,000, $90,000 - $105,000, and $105,000 - $120,000.  An initial analysis through a side-by-side bar graph shows that most institutions are within the median income range of $45,000 and $90,000.  Fewer institutions are established in counties with large median incomes and private non-profit institutions are more numerous in the median income ranges compared to the other types of institutions.  A follow-up chi-squared test for independence was made with a null hypothesis that there is no association between the type of institution and county median income which it is located and an alternative hypothesis that here is an association between the type of institution and county median income which it is located.  With a small p-value (0.001 < 0.05) resulting from the chi-squared test there is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is an association between the type of institution and the median income of residents in the counties they share.  This is further backed up by the visual representation in the bar chart which shows more Private Non-Profit institutions being more numerous in each category.  Overall, all institutions are not surprising located within where most of the median incomes are reported by the US Census.  These results do align with the poverty rate analysis earlier.
###	The regression analysis of median income and average yearly cost, in-state tuition, and out of state tuition show that there is no linear relationship (Average Cost: r = 0.1687, In-state: r = 0.1463, Out-state: r = 0.1150). This implies that regardless of where the school is located, the cost to attending the institutions are not aligned to the area that they cater to base on median income of the county.
